# Unid - Integer server and client

## Project overview

The unid project provides a source of unique qnd asending integers to an
application. The application uses the integers as primary keys within a
distributed database environment. These integers are called Unids (Universal
Ids).

A Unid has the following charactersics:

1. They are unque tnd sequential
1. They are available in 16-bit, 32-bit, 64 bit and 128-bit integerso 
1. They are available to in a distributed end global application
1. They are failsafe

The primary use case for Unids is a distributed database environment where
there is a need of unique identifiers that will never confilct within the
distribute database. Currently, many database applications use UUIDs as
primary keys. Unids provide the uniqueness and lack of the potential for
collisions in a database application, and also have the following advantages:

1. Unids provide more efficient database indexes
1. Unids take up less space in the database
1. Unids are more user friendly
1. Unids are more performant

### How are they more efficiently indexed?

UUIDs as primary keys in a database can lead to several performance and
operational challenges, primarily due to the randomness (especially with UUID
v4). Also, UUIDs are larger size (128 bits) compared to Unids, that are
available in a variety of sizes, from 16-bit to 128-bits as needed by
the database application use case.

UUIDs inserted into random locations with B-tree indexes fore frequent "page
splits" and index rebalancing. Unids are ideal for primary key indexes.

### How do they save space within the database?

UUIDs are 128-bit entities in their binary storage within a database. Unids
are available in multiple bit widths, and are most typically 64-bit width.
With a 64-bit width, allows 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 unique keys values.

Just to store all possible key values, it would require 16 exabytes (16 million
terrabytes) of disk space. This amount is not currently achievable with physical
hardware, as it represents the theoretical maximum addressable space of a 64-bit
system! UUIDs waste space.

### How are they more user friendly?

UUIDs are represented as long, hyphenated hexidecimal numbers that are
almost impossible to enter. Unids are simple integers. For example, take two
representations of a database row in a querty:

GET /patient/3f5a89e1-e94f-4a0b-930a-289b41a5d629

versus

GET /patient/63517

### How are they more performant?

A Unid Client is installed on the server associated with database insert
operations. The application obtains Unids from a Unid Client using either
IPC shared memory, or sockets. Access to the Unid integer is as fast as a
memory access.

For architectures where the UUID is generated by the database,
the application needs to make a second request to get the UUID from the
database which is a slow operation. For application generation of the UUID,
it requires a function call that is also much slower than accessing a Unid
from shared memory.

## Repository structure

The unid repository is a "mono-repository" that contains the development
environment for the Unid Server, the Unid Client, and the Unild Library. The
Unid Library is linked with both the Server and Client and contains code that
is shared between the Server and Client programs.

This repository is located at https://github.com/unidly/unid and is
not publically accessible.

unid
  |-- README.md - this file
  |-- CMakeLists.txt - the project top level CML
  |-- build/ - top level cmake build directory
  |-- client/ - the Unid Client code
  |-- doc/ - the project documentation
  |-- library/ - the Unid Library (shared classes and data structures)
  |-- spike/ - simple programs used to benchmark and learn about libs
  |-- test/ - unit tests
  |-- tools/ - miscellaneous comman line tools

A separate repository is used to de-couple the Unid Api from the Unid
software. The Unid Api library is for use by an application that interfaces
with a Unid Client. This repository is public facing and provides the library
and documentation, including detailed examples, of how to set up and use a
Unid Client, as well as how to subscribe to the service and access Unids as
part of the subscription.

This repository is located at https://github.com/unidly/unidly_api and is
publically accessible.

unid_api
  |-- README.md
  |-- CMakeLists.txt
  |-- build/
  |-- doc/
  |-- include/
  |-- src/
  |-- test/
  |-- tools/
